a letter signed by hundreds of
international journalists says Western
media coverage of the Gaza War has been
biased in favor of Israel and against
Palestine newsrooms were accused of
dehumanizing Palestinians are the
allegations fair this is Inside
Story
[Music]
hello there and welcome to the program
I'm Laura Kyle the world's television
screens newspapers and online media have
been filled with pictures of Israel's
war on Gaza which has killed nearly
12,000 Palestinians most of them women
and children they've also featured the
Hamas attacks of October the 7th which
killed 1,200 Israelis modern technology
means there's more media coverage than
ever before but some of this coverage
has been criticized by journalists
themselves hundreds have signed a letter
accusing Western media of biased
reporting of the Gaza War they work for
organizations such as Reuters The
Washington Post the Los Angeles Times
And The Guardian let's take a look at
some of the main points in the
letter we hold Western newsrooms
accountable for dehumanizing rhetoric
that has served to justify ethnic
cleansing of pal Palestinians double
standards inaccuracies and fallacies
abound in American Publications and have
been well documented newsrooms have
instead undermined Palestinian Arab and
Muslim perspectives dismissing them as
unreliable and have evoked inflammatory
language that reinforces islamophobic
and racist tropes they have printed
misinformation spread by Israeli
officials and failed to scrutinize and
discriminate killing of civilians in
Gaza committed with the support of the
US government this is our job to hold
power to account otherwise we risk
becoming accessories to genocide we are
renewing the call for journalists to
tell the full truth without fear or
favor to use precise terms that are well
defined by international human rights
organizations including apartheid ethnic
cleansing and genocide to recognize that
contorting our words to hide evidence of
war crimes or is Israel's oppression of
Palestinians is journalistic malpractice
and an abdication of moral
clarity now there has of course been
plenty of balanced and compelling
reporting in Western media on the plight
of Palestinians and the devastating
impact of the Israeli War on Gaza but
there's also been plenty of instances
where Hardline pro-israeli government
statements have gone
unchallenged Israel is not engaged in
genocide and then another thing we need
to deal with is the whitewashing of the
status of people in Gaza uh I'm sure
there are plenty of people would love to
be free from uh Hamas but the most
radicalized people on the planet live in
the Gaza Strip they've been taught since
birth uh to kill and hate the Jews how
do you teach math in Gaza if you had 10
Jews and you kill six how many would be
left that's been in their school
system us Republican presidential
candidates have lined up to voice their
support for Israel during a televised
debate this week the result a platform
for unchallenged and extreme views
supporting the bombing of
Gaza the first thing I said to him when
it happened was I said finish them
finish them and the reason is I worked
on this every day when I was at the
United Nations and we have to remember
that they have to one eliminate Hamas
two support Israel with whatever they
need whenever they need it and three
make sure we bring our hostages home
and the Washington Post took a cartoon
off its website after a backlash it was
criticized as being racist and for its
dehumanizing portrayal of the
[Music]
Palestinians let's bring in our guests
now and in Toronto pent matar an
independent journalist and 2022 nyman
fellow at Harvard University she's also
a former producer at CBC News in London
ammed al- nauk had journalist and
co-founder of we are not numbers that's
a nonprofit organization that seeks to
amplify voices and stories from Gaza and
here in doar is Mark Owen Jones
associate professor of Middle East
studies at hammed bin Khalifa University
his research focuses on disinformation
and propaganda a very warm welcome to
all of you perent this is a pretty
powerful letter written and signed by
journalists themselves to their
employers you're one of the signaries
why did you sign
it quite frankly Laura I have been
horrified and disappointed by the lack
of Courage from our profession the lack
of concern for our fellow journalists in
Gazza who are not only risking their
lives but their family's lives they are
on the move they are trying to report on
what's Happening as the only people
bearing witness to the suffering of the
people of razza and I'm quite frankly so
alarmed that we are now looking at over
39 journalists who have been killed and
at least in the west it seems like there
is abject Silence about this uh and so
when I saw the letter circulating I
thought if we can't as a profession as
journalists condemn the killing of our
fellow journalists then what are we
doing here uh it was just such a clear
letter and it also got at the difficulty
of reporting on this not just within
which is the most immediate but the
difficulty of talking about this and
Reporting on this with Clarity uh in
mainstream news organizations which has
been challenging for a very long time
and that's why I added my name to it
there was a lot of fear in talking about
this and I think there is power in
Collective action and in journalists
banding together to say we have an
obligation to cover this fairly um and
to call out the uh targeting of
journalists like us it could be any one
of us that are being targeted right now
what instances have have you found
challenging well I was a longtime
producer at CBC the Canadian
Broadcasting Corporation and I can tell
you that in my 10 years of working there
I produced thousands of interviews I
worked on a daily current affairs uh
news show so thousands of interviews
over 10 years but the one story of mine
Laura that never saw the light of day an
interview that I had produced um and in
10 years the one story that did not make
it to air was an interview that I had
produced with a Palestinian American
journalist your former Al jazer
colleague Ahmed shahabad Emy nominated
journalist who was reporting on protest
in Jerusalem in
2017 and ironically one of the things
that we spoke to him about was the
difficulty of covering this he had in
the course of his reporting been stopped
questioned uh jostled around by Israeli
Security Forces on video by the way
which is what Drew my attention to him
and thought I should talk to him about
this for our show and when we record Ed
the interview with him uh uh I came back
after editing it came coming back from a
break and was told with no discussion by
hires up that this interview would not
air that they did not have time to
explain it to me and it was
unceremoniously yanked with no editorial
discussion and it was the first and only
time in my entire history at the CBC
where an interview did not make it to
air and I still to this day am not clear
as to why and so that is just one Stark
example of the difficulty of putting on
Palestinian voices of talking about uh
the view from Palestine specifically I
would say from Arab Arab adjacent Muslim
journalists Palestinians themselves are
often silenced uh without a lot of due
process editorially and it is just an
opaque difficult thing and the only
reason I was able to talk about it is
because I wrote about it in an article
that was fact checked and bulletproof in
an independent magazine here and that
was the way that I found that I could
talk about this three years later in
2020 okay pres we'll suddenly look at
the reasons perhaps why uh that
interview wasn't air just a little later
in the discussion first of all Mark I
just want to get some uh examples from
you because I know you've been looking
at the UK media give us an idea of what
you're seeing though and the way that
you're seeing bias creeping in and the
dehumanization of Palestinians becoming
the norm well I think a key aspect of
dehumanization is also marginalization
if you can make a people invisible if
you can make their suffering disappear
then you're going to basically be
controlling how much sympathy the public
have for those people and I was for
example examining the front pages of a
number of the the the British press
including the Daily Mail which is one of
the most circulated newspapers in the UK
and I found in the first 14 days of the
the conflict or the war rather that they
did not mention once on the front page
uh the cumulative total of pales Ians
killed in Raza okay and this is despite
mentioning the number of Israelis who
were killed on October the 7th and
thereabouts several different times so I
thought this to me was a really striking
example of how for example uh
Palestinians are removed from the
picture they're removed from suffering
it's almost as if you know the Israeli
suffering was was the only kind of
suffering that was worth mentioning on
the front page of these newspapers and I
think we shouldn't take that lightly I'm
not saying that you know these figures
weren't mentioned uh in the paper on a
different page but I think we all know
that the front page the headline is a
really important positioning it it's
what many people read it's the only
thing some people read and it also gives
us an insight into that editorial
process what does that newspapers want
us to think about what's going on in
Gaza and this is just one example of a
number and that doesn't even start to
mention the use of language the
dehumanizing nature of language and this
is another thing I'd really like to
mention what I've noticed even in sort
of the more quality papers in the UK
like the guardian often they will
preface what Hamas did with terms like
brutal and Massacre but when it comes to
for example the Israeli bombing of of
Gaza which has killed over 10,000 people
in horrific brutal ways terms like
brutal are never used it's always things
like Precision strike or collateral
damage right so there's this kind of you
know double spe going on when reporting
about Israeli atrocities that is not
used when it comes to you know those
perceived atrocities carried out by
Palestinians and and this is not
accidental you know this is you know how
how writing is constructed to actually
marginalize the suffering of
Palestinians and this has been an
ongoing uh issue in how Western media
generally has portrayed what's going on
in Palestine and it's
unacceptable Ahmed you've been on the
receiving end of this bias yourself your
your own suffering has been uh belittled
will you share with us your
experience thank you thank you very much
for having me actually what's going on
here and the Western media bias in
Palestine is not new we are used to it
it has been ongoing for the past 75
years
and uh recently in during the past three
weeks I lost 21 family members and uh
there were civilians they were sleeping
in their home and Israel bombed them
including 14 of my nieces and nephews
who were kids they were killed and then
the media invited me a lot of media
Outlets invited me to talk and to speak
about my family and what's going on but
the problem with with that is it is
always the media invite the Palestinians
to speak in order to embarrass them in
order to put them in a in a position
where they have to defend themselves to
prove the the worthiness to the to the
Wern audience for example I L 21 family
members in just one bomb and then in one
of the interviews they said Ahmed lost
21 family members they did not say
Israel killed 21 family members of Ahmed
while they were asleep they said lost
but when you talk about the Israelis and
when they describe the Israelis they
always say Israelis are brutally killed
massacred terrorists killed them but the
Palestinians they just lose their family
me their family members the the
Palestinians die all the time that's the
problem and on many other cases they on
many other TV appearances they ask me
after knowing that I lost a 21 family
members they asked me to condemn Hamas
or what they what do I think of Hamas or
if I were close to my brothers and
sisters who I grew up in my entire life
with so it's always our perception is
countered with u disbelief they they
want to make sure that I am correct that
my my family means something to me U
many of the big Publications also uh
wrote interviews with wrote articles
about me and every single information I
tell them about my family they want
proof they want to see my house on
Google Maps they want to know the names
of my brothers and sisters and their
ages and what they were doing and these
interviews went through a lot a lot of
scity because they want to make sure
that I'm not lying so they always have
this impression that I might be lying
that my family is Hamas that there's a
justification whatsoever but when you
compare that with what happened in isra
in 7th of October the same mainstream uh
media Outlets they were not reluctant to
disseminate information and lies and
fake news by the Israelis without any
scrunity without any Factor checking
without any U without any
professional media work that's the
problem I've been on many many TV
appearances during the past one month
and in every one of them it is almost
that they want to ask ask me if I
condemn Hamas or not because they think
that condemning Hamas or the question is
about Hamas is a l my that I have to do
I have to undertake in order to prove
that I'm worthy of being heard that's
the problem we have been suffering with
the mainstream media for 75 years is
that always the Palestinians are less
worthy our life are less important and
then yesterday for example uh to TV did
an interview with me and then I was I
wanted to know what what the comments on
their YouTube channel and every single
comment on that interview was very very
very negative everyone said that I do
not deserve sympathy because I did not
condemn Hamas I wasn't asked by the way
to condemn Hamas on that interview but
they said that I don't deserve sympathy
some people think thought it was too
weird that I have 20 20 family members
and that I am lying because I have 20
family members think think there are too
many and they shouldn't be uh I
shouldn't have too many family members
and I don't blame the people who say
that but it is this is the outcome of
Decades of Western media disinformation
and lies about the Palestinian people
and demonization of the Palestinian
people just jump in there I just want to
get an idea from percent who's just you
know recently been with CBC is a very
mainstream media there in in Canada do
you understand do you do you accept that
there's this reluctance to accept
Palestinian suffering as equal to
Israeli suffering uh that it needs to be
scrutinized that the stories need to be
fact checked do you see that happening
in the newsrooms where you've been
working absolutely and and even before
getting to a stage of of factchecking or
verifying the bar for getting
Palestinian voices or stories about
Palestine on the air is is so high it is
almost uh it's an impossible bar to meet
and when we do reach that threshold it
is because there has been an attack on
Israelis Israelis have been killed or
injured and that then gives us the green
light in Western media often to wait
into it and it is often contextless uh
Palestinians rarely get on to talk about
their lives uh the daily injustices that
they face the missing context that has
been missing from coverage about
Palestine and Israel for so long and you
know what we see often is the a very
limited window of conversation these
days it is do you condemn Hamas do you
condemn Hamas even when Palestinians do
make it onto the air is often what I
would call trauma porn tell us about
your pain tell us about who you've lost
but when we start to get into the
context and holding Israel accountable
um you know bringing it back to
journalists you know Israel has
deliberately targeted journalists and
not just journalists who are in the
field but journalists sleeping in their
homes along with their families and so
there is often a a missing context and a
missing clarity about the violence and
the death that Palestinians are
experiencing and it seems to only be
discussed when Israelis face violence
first and then Palestinians are brought
on to respond to this and uh the context
piece has been very very hard to get at
because then you're looking at words
like
occupation like you know international
human rights groups talking about ethnic
cleansing and genocide the United
Nations um but there is such reluctance
to talk about these things and then
there are groups that you know have gone
after and as a rule go after anyone in
the media who talks about uh Palestinian
Freedom Palestinian the occupation and
they say that this is anti-Semitic they
say that you know you're calling for the
destruction of Israel and it gets so
warped and so basically Newsroom
managers do not want this headache a lot
of it is just fear there's a chill
because talking about this gets people
riled up and the accusations of anti
anti-Semitism fly there has been such a
flattening of you know criticism of uh
policies of the state of Israel the
Israeli government is often just uh seen
as anti-semitic and so therefore no one
wants to touch it and no Newsroom
managers want to deal with Ombudsman
complaints so therefore we just don't
wait into it and this has been going on
for a very long time and I think we're
seeing the results of this right now you
brought up so many good points there
that I want to look at I'm just going to
pick up on that culture of fear that you
mentioned Mark how risky is it for
journalists like pent to speak out like
this we've seen people in the past
speaking up and then losing their jobs
over it I mean I think you know we're
seeing this uh ample evidence of this
right now several journalists in the US
have have lost their jobs for various
reason including signing on a letter
that was condemning you know the the the
the sort of just the unbelievable level
of violence enacted by Israel on
Palestinians we saw someone fired from a
position editing a magazine because he
endorsed or he liked and praised a
satirical onion article because he was
saying that the onion which is this hcal
American News Outlet was actually
providing some of the most astute and
critical coverage in the US of what was
going on Palestine could you imagine
what kind of state we're living in when
people are lose their job a journalist
will lose their job simply for
appreciating satire which was happening
within the bounds of the law I mean it's
actually terrifying and I think you know
these these kind of risks
are everywhere even as an academic I
faced it myself I got a a a an email
from a journalist a British journalist
uh going through my tweets trying to
basically find any evidence that I was
quote unquote anti-semitic and one of
the tweets he used as an example to try
and cite me as being anti-semitic in
this article he wanted to write was one
where I said why do people have a
problem when you compare for example
media coverage or coverage of Palestine
with that of Ukraine how on Earth is
that even remotely anti-Semitic how is
it even remotely anti-israeli so I mean
there's one thing where there's this
attempt which is really common to
basically accuse anyone who's remotely
critical of Israel as being anti-semitic
but then this this other level where
you're accusing people who aren't even
criticizing Israel of being anti-semitic
you know it is this huge flattening that
we see and it's hugely problematic and
and I and I worry and this is this draws
on the point that was just being made
about context what happens and this is
happened to many people including myself
and other journalists who try to talk
about the backstory right the thing is
with of with news media and journalism
it tries to create a beginning and a
middle and an end to a story right this
is where this whole do you condemn Hamas
comes in what journalists are trying to
do that is trying to say okay we want
you to admit that Hamas started it and
then once you admit that then we'll talk
to you which is preposterous right um
and it's always trying to ref frame any
form of Israeli aggression as a response
as a retaliation to what Hamas did none
of this is about you know Decades of
occupation and apartheid and
brutalization being the reason for
causing what happened on the the 7th of
October you know that's that's not how
it's framed so the whole do you condemn
Hamas is a form of gaslighting it's a
form of basically Palestinians trying to
acknowledge that they are complicit
somehow in their own suffering and this
discourse continues throughout even the
arguments that you know Hamas used human
Shields right that you know Palestinians
live in crowded areas all it's all
designed in a way to make it sound like
Palestinian deaths are somehow their own
doing well this is the point that I
wanted to actually bring ammed in on
it's this idea of context again and
because we keep seeing in many Western
media Outlets pro-israeli government
voices coming on saying this started on
October the 7th we're missing aren't we
ammed the context here there's little
space in many Western media Outlets to
talk about the situation before October
the 7th using words like pent said of a
partide of occupation this is what's
missing of course this is uh Missing now
it has always been missing uh I did my
my my master's degree in uh in
journalism and my desertation was about
the W media coverage in Palestine and I
can safely say that one of the main
important uh topics that we're talking
about the main problems that we're
having with the Western media is the
lack of context and also of what the
Western media exclude rather than what
they include for example if you uh took
if if you uh work at a human right if
you work at um a newspaper and if you
say that the Palestinian people have
been living under military occupation
for the past uh 57 years it will make a
huge difference if you talk about the
settlements that are spreading in the
West Bank where there is no Hamas in the
West Bank it will make a huge difference
to the reader there are many many if you
took about the collective punishment of
siege that has been uh ongoing in Gaza
for the past 17 years people will have a
context they will have an understanding
of what's actually going on right now
the media only focuses or tell the
stories of the palestin or talk about
about the conflict when there are
Israelis killed for example since the
beginning of this year more than 400
Palestinian people were killed in the
west bank and then the media talked
about it they only talk to us they only
talk to the Palestinians when there are
Israeli killed as if the Israelis are
the only important people here the only
lives that matter and the Palestinians
life don't matter they don't talk about
the OCC the military occupation they
don't talk about the neba you never hear
about theba or the catastrophe that
happened to the Palestinian 75 years ago
which displaced uh uh
hundreds of thousands of Palestinians
from their home all of this context is
never provided to the audience and
that's why the audience will only know
about Gaza or talk about Gaza when there
are bombing when there are Israelis
killed and this will give the the
audience a negative perception about uh
about about this conflict so this is one
of the main problems that we are
suffering from and it's only the
Palestinians are portrayed in in a bad
in a negative in a negative way they
don't talk about success stories about
talents about the the bright side of the
Palestinians they only talk about the
Palestinians when there are when there
is a Bloodshed that's a problem and
that's why we have a lot of misin a lot
of stereotypes in the west about
Palestine and about what's going on in
in Palestine Mark I just want to bring
you back to that point that you said
about the the number of uh Palestinian
deaths being missing from uh front page
coverage uh when the number of Israeli
deaths is is frequently reported do you
think as an audience as a a consumer of
news that we have a higher threat
threshold for State violence over
non-state violence do you think that
plays into it um I don't know if we have
a higher threshold uh but I think you
know it depends how you want to play it
I mean are you saying I mean Hamas are
elected right are can we say that that's
State violence too why are we treating
Hamas as this terrorist organization
whereas Israeli violence is somehow more
legitimate you know Israel are
constantly in violation of international
law uh they're you know bombing with
these kind of indiscriminate weapons
densely populated area that are killing
hundreds of people I don't think it
should matter or not whether this
violence is State violence or not I
think what we're trying to see we're
just trying to see this deliberate
attempt to marginalized human suffering
and and and the the 10 thousands of
people killed I think if that was
anywhere else if that was in Ukraine we
would see a lot of attention P to that
story so I don't think it's about State
violence per say I mean Russia is a
state and it's killing people but what I
do think here is this really interesting
politicization over the number of people
killed the number of Palestinians killed
is becoming a political problem for even
Biden and Israel look what Biden did he
went on the news to try and cast out on
the number of Palestinians killed by
using terms like hamus run Health
Ministry we cannot trust these numbers
and where was the source for this story
Israeli intelligence it was some guy who
used to be a bureau chief in Jerusalem
who said that we can't trust Hamas as
numbers right that was that was the
source for that story and no one
actually mentioned that the guy who the
source for that story was was actually
also working now for a PR firm I mean
it's absurd and and one sorry just one
second it's just today the Israelis even
downgraded the number of their
casualties right and I just think it's
important it's it's not to say to
undermine that that's a tragedy of the
the amount of civilians that died but at
the end of the day the Israelis have
lowered downgraded the number of people
killed there was never any 200 I just
want to I just want to get the last word
into you because we've only got a minute
left on the discussion you've written
you've signed this
letter do you think it's going to have
any impact on the way the Israeli GSA
War is going to be covered from here on
in I I I don't know Laura and the fact
that I don't know if this will have any
impact is is I think um is chilling but
I have just been haunted by watching
journalists um you know there was a a
Palestine TV journalist who openly wept
on TV uh Salman Al Bashir was crying
about his colleague Muhammad abat just
within the last week who was killed
after finishing his coverage going home
to sleep and I was haunted by this
Palestine TV correspondent standing
outside of a hospital seeing his
colleague come in dead who had just been
reporting before him and he took off his
press vest he took off his helmet and
said we are victims we are being
targeted one by one and these things are
not protecting us there is no
International protection and uh I was
haunted by
that from Al the the Gaza bureau chief
his he lost his whole family his wife
his daughter his son his grandchild and
was on the air the next day saying I'm
committed to telling the story so that
is what motivates me to sign and to to
hopefully um you know have a
conversation about if we can't even
condemn the killing of our fellow
journalists how can we condemn The Wider
genocide that is taking place against uh
Palestinian civilians in the tens of
thou like over 10,000 now I'm haunted by
it and if this letter is just a A Drop
in the Ocean I hope it's one that
creates a very necessary conversation
about what's happening now at least in
the journalistic Community okay well
hopefully this is part of that
conversation many thanks to all our
guests for joining us here today pent
mat Ahmed al- Na and Mark Owen James and
thank you too for watching you can see
the program again anytime by visiting
our website that's aljazeera.com and for
further discussion do go to our Facebook
page that's facebook.com AJ insidestory
you can also join the conversation on X
our handl is at AJ insid story from me
Laura Kyle and the whole team here it's
bye for
now